Title: Kabukicho Strip Club
Tagline: A story from Kabukicho, Tokyo
Slug: strip-club-kabukicho
Category: Stories
Date: 2012-04-12

*Note: this was going to be an entire series on a trip to Japan, but I
never got around to writing the other posts, so it will just be a
stand-alone. The story is mostly true except for the parts I made up.*

I visited Tokyo with a friend for a month earlier this year. And, like
all your friends tell you when they leave Japan, it left a stain on my
heart.

Things work. Trains run on time. Turnstiles turn. Bins are empty.
Vending machines vend alcohol but no one's drunk. People don't talk on
trains. In fact, people barely talk unnecessarily. But still, the place
has a soul the size of Siberia. <span class="pull_quote right">Every
deviance is allocated a patch of existence.</span> The perverts, the
gangsters, the drunks and the homeless have their place.

And, of course, there's women so beautiful that religion is considered.

For people living there it's not quite so utopic. Work days are over 12
hours. Days off are few.

* * * * *

We walked around the neon-bathed Kabukicho for an hour looking for a
restaurant. It was our third night in Tokyo. John insisted that we eat
at the busiest but they were all empty. Saturday, I guess, was a work
night. When the hunger was unbearable, we settled for a place with a
nice sign. I ate a plate of mixed meats and drank two bottles of cold
saki.

I left the restaurant hungry, John did too. We found a sushi bar. We ate
and drank more saki. The alcohol began to work. We left for more.

John asked girls in the street which bars we should go to. No one knew
or they didn't want us fucking up the good spots. A group of teenagers
tried to help but they were too drunk. They pointed skyward to the
direction of the bar they thought they'd come from and laughed. The
Japanese sprukers, mostly Yukusa types, hassled us politely as we
walked. There were Nigerians too, who were usually less polite. More on
that later.

A short, fat Japanese man approached from a dark place.

"Tits?" he asks.

"Yes, but not under these circumstances."

"Blowjob?"

Same deal.

"Bondage?"

"Hmmm..."

"Gay club? Big dick in mouth?"

"Maybe later in life."

John spoke a little Japanese and told him that we wanted a quiet place to drink. No cover charge. The fat man was impressed. He left his post for a second and took us to that place.

We drank with a women and her husband at their bar. She spoke no
English, he spoke a little. They didn't talk much but smiled a lot. I
ordered scotch. John drank saki. The place was patronless except for a
tall Canadian. He said he was an architect.

Somewhere in the night, the bartender's husband asked us if we liked
strippers.

We did.

He lead us out his bar, down a path, into an unmarked doorway. An old
women behind a dingy counter told us the cover charge was 150 yen. The
Canadian had forgotten to go to the ATM. He let me pay for him.

We walked down a flight of old stairs into a room with 5 rows of seats,
4 seats per row. It was a packed house except for a few back row
positions. Alchohol wasn't available in the club but people had brought
their own. They sipped in silence.

We took our seats toward the back.

A few more people came and took their seats.

Then the lights dimmed.


* * * * *

Traditional music starts to play. The stage illuminates. A women glides
out en pointe in a geisha costume. She twirls bamboo gracefully. She is
elegant and beautiful. Too beautiful. An old man in the front row is
moved almost to tears. She strikes a pose front stage and the lights
dim. She exits. The crowd cheers.

We wait in the dark for the next act.

The lights bright. Two men to the side of the stage throw confetti on
the stage. Techno plays. The women returns in a school uniform. She
dances cute. The crowd claps along to the song. She looses the top half
of her outfit. The crowd cheers. She dances a bit longer then exits. The
old man screams out with the crowd.

The lights dim again. The old man takes a hankerchief from his pocket
and breaths into it.

We wait again. The Canadian man whispers into my ear: "Here comes the
best bit."

Ambient music plays. The lights come on. Confetti is thrown. The old man
grips his handkerchief until his knuckles are white.

She comes out with only a furry hat with sides that extend down to her
waist. She tiptoes out front stage, strikes and holds a pose. The stage
rotates 360. Then, she lies on her back and raises her leg and leaves it
there. The old man's eyes are wide, his handkerchief is soaked. It could
be his last show.

She changes her pose again. More confetti is thrown.
<span class="pull_quote left">The confetti professions never miss their
cue.</span> More of this happens until eventually the lights go out
again.

Thunderous applause. Whistling. A performance.

The lights come on again. She walks out and sits by the stage. Men form
a queue in front of her. One approaches with 2000 yen in his hand. She
takes it and hands him a Polaroid camera. He asks her to paw like a cat.
She does and he gets his photo. The next man approaches her. He just
wants her to stare into the lens. He gets his photo.

I desperately search for yen. I find enough. I approach for a photo. She
hands me the Polaroid but it's too much for me to take and I snap a
photo before she's ready. The crowd laughs. She lets me take another
photo.

When there were no more photos to be taken. She bowes and exits. The
lights dim. The next performer is announced over a loud speaker. The old
man puts away his handkerchief.
